First pass at Bazel for iOS developers and outline (#235)
pinterest/xchammer: Docs/BazelForiOSDevelopers.md

# Bazel for iOS Developers

This document is an introduction to Bazel for iOS developers. There's a few
other resources available for Bazel as well:

> - https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/tutorial/ios-app.html

Reviewer: I would explain why you might want to read the readme instead of the link (this explains more of the why than the how)

- [Bazel overview](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/bazel-overview.html)
- [A tutorial for iOS apps](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/tutorial/ios-app.html) 
- [Bazel Concepts and terminology](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/build-ref.html)
- [Getting started with Bazel](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/getting-started.html) 

## Build systems for iOS developers

First, let's address the definiton of a `Build system`. According to [Stack
overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7249871/what-is-a-build-tool_),
_Build tools are programs that automate the creation of executable applications
from source code(eg. .apk for android app). Building incorporates
compiling,linking and packaging the code into a usable or executable form._

In iOS development, Apple encapsulates build systems inside of Xcode. Xcode is
both the IDE _and build system_. For many developers, Xcode just works. To have
a good experience, most developers don't need to worry about implementing build
systems, IDEs, or compilers. When the project scales, developer experience
drops off. Tasks like building, indexing, or merging a change that adds a new
file can become painful. 

> Bazel makes it easy to manage build configuration in a way that results are

Author: in a way that yields reproducible builds. In other words, performing the build will always produce the same result.
_with the exception of when you use implicit clang modules_ 🤦‍♀️

functional and reproducible. In addition to producing an iOS application, Bazel
makes it easy to automate many other kinds tasks for example, code generating a

> thrift schema, generating an Xcode project, and pushing a docker container.

Reviewer 2: can we link out to examples of definitions of these?

Author: Good call

Having the ability to optimize the build system can significantly improve the
developer experience.

Compared to other mainstream build systems, Bazel is strict about inputs and
outputs. This characteristic makes it reproducible and well suited for

> distributed cloud builds and caching. _To learn about how Bazel compares to

Reviewer 3: Its probably helpful to add how strictness or cloud builds improve the developer experience.

Author: Good point, here's a few I can think of:
- performance ( this one is a pretty big one ).
- not having to constantly remove derived data for local builds
- makes it easier to manage CI with caching ( e.g. we haven't cleaned it since adopting Bazel )

Overall, it'd probably be good to have a concise segment on the benefits

other build systems, Microsoft's paper [Build Systems à la
Carte](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2018/03/build-systems.pdf),
compares popular build systems._

## Introduction to Bazel projects

The root of a Bazel project contains two human readable files:

The `BUILD` file - these files define what targets are inside of a project.
Applications, extensions, static libraries, and frameworks are all declared in
BUILD files.

The `WORKSPACE` file - this file is about getting files and dependencies from
[outside the world into
Bazel](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/workspace.html).  Simply
put, external-to-bazel dependencies are put here. 

_The closest notion to BUILD files in the Xcode world, is the machine readble

> `xcodeproj` files managed by Xcode._

Reviewer 4: Agreed with @rahul-malik. Also a small typo: `readble` -> `readable`

> `xcodeproj` files managed by Xcode._

Author: That's a good point, perhaps I should put: Information stored in `BUILD` file is often stored in a machine readable file format.

## WORKSPACE configuration and setting up rules_apple

For building iOS applications, most iOS developers use the rule set
`rules_apple`. `rules_apple` contains key rules for iOS development which

> includes rules to build applications, unit tests, and more.

Reviewer 3: Might be helpful to either describe or link to Bazel's documentation of rules here (what is a rule? etc)

Author: Good point, will link to the latter segment:
https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer/pull/235/files#diff-af23f534f9648f42a375a8dbf3792f8bR136

Head to [rules_apple](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple) and follow the
latest instructions to get setup. `rules_apple` provides instructions to add
dependencies into the `WORKSPACE` file. Simply paste the lines from
`rules_apple`'s README into the `WORKSPACE` file

```
# /path/to/myproject/WORKSPACE
load("@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl", "git_repository")

git_repository(
    name = "build_bazel_rules_apple",
    remote = "https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple.git",
    commit = "[SOME_HASH_VALUE]",
)
```

The first line of code calls the function, `load`. The load function imports

> symbols from a `.bzl` file.  In Objective-C or swift, it's like importing a

Reviewer 3: nit: Capitalize "Swift"

Author: Done

header file.

```
load("@bazel_tools//tools/build_defs/repo:git.bzl", "git_repository")
```
_load `git_repository` from the internal [bazel tools](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/4301) repository_

The next line of code calls `git_repository` defines `build_bazel_rules_apple`
from the git repository, `https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple` for a
given `commit`. 

_`git_repository` documentation https://docs.bazel.build/versions/2.0.0/repo/git.html_

### BUILD files

> `BUILD` files are where all the targets are defined.

Reviewer 3: briefly list off examples of targets (application, library, test, ...)

Author: Done

First, let's walk through creating a basic iOS application. In the root of the
project, let's create the `BUILD` file. First, a library for the iOS
application sources. The following code defines an `objc_library`, `sources`.
In Xcode this is similar to navigating in the GUI and hitting `File -> New
Target` 

```
# /path/to/myproject/BUILD
objc_library(
    name="sources",
    srcs=["main.m"]
)
```

> Next, create the application target with `rules_apple`'s `ios_applicaiton` rule.

Reviewer 3: s/ios_applicaiton/ios_application

```

Bazel and open source rules should provide most functionality to build an iOS
application. Generally, defining custom rules isn't required but can improve
and consolidate functionality. To learn more about how to create custom rules,
the document, [Bazel extensions](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/concepts.html)
contains a comprehensive overview.
	
### Command line usage

In Xcode, command line builds are achieved through the command line interface
`xcodebuild`.  to build the scheme `ios-app` from `MyProject.xcworkspace`,
`xcodebuild`, would be invoked as:

```
xcodebuild -workspace MyProject.xcworkspace -scheme ios-app
```

Bazel exposes a command line which can also do builds. In Bazel, _every_ target
is in the global WORKSPACE and there is no notion of schemes.
```
bazel build ios-app
```

The Bazel command line has hundreds of options, which can be found in the
[Bazel
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/command-line-reference.html).
For iOS developers, a set of useful flags is available at
[bazel-ios-users](https://github.com/ios-bazel-users/ios-bazel-users/blob/master/UsefulFlags.md).

> In addition to the default bazel options, it's common to create custom

Reviewer 3: nit: Bazel

configuration settings to customize builds, so the possible Bazel command line
permutations are endless.

> For example, the following build file has conditional `copts` on `:app_store`

Reviewer 2: for a Bazel layperson, COPTS is one of those things that I can't wrap my head around. Bazel docs list what it does, but not _why_ it's named COPTS. It'd be nice to have a super short explainer here

Author: I agree it'd probably be useful to have a segment on C++ compiler flags which are split between:
- toolchains
- objc_library
- bazelrc
- defines

```
objc_library(
   name = "some",
   srcs = ["some.m"],

>    copts = select({

Author: Good point will do

      # For app_store we need to build `some.m` with a special copt
      ":app_store": ["-DAPPSTORE=1"],
      "//conditions:default": [],
    })
)
config_setting(
    name = "app_store",
    values = { "app_store" : "true" }
)
```

This is passed in as a define to Bazel
```
bazel build ios-app --define app_store=true
```

For more information about `config_setting`, please see the [Bazel
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/common-definitions.html#configurable-attributes).

> ### Configuration of libraries and flags via macros

Reviewer 3: I think it might be simpler to title this section "Macros" similar to "Rules"

Author: Will do! I've got a segment for `#rules` as well, so I'll scope down to macros

Most users of Bazel implement a higher level system of macros to encapsulate
defaults of building librarys and simplify configuration management. 

Bazel provides the pythonic programming language Starlark to implement such
build system logic. Like rules and aspects, macros are defined in `.bzl` files.
A macro is a convenient way to call a rule, and not recognized by Bazel in the
same way a rule is.

_Note: The main distinction between a `.bzl` and a `BUILD` file is `BUILD` files are
used to create targets by calling macros and rules. `.bzl` files define the
implementation._

> To create a wrapper for `objc_library`, create the file `objc_library.bzl`. The

Reviewer 3: maybe it would be better to have the example macro not match the native `objc_library` rule name exactly? That seems like it might be more confusing.

You could have `pins_objc_library` for example and likely get the same points across

Author: I think this is an opinionated implementation choice. Personally, I think it's nice and also prevents people from re-using `objc_library` when they should be using the one that prevents overriding `copts`. I liked up the py rules in the original discussion as well.

following macro restricts the customization, and enforces defaults of the
native `objc_library` rule.

```
def objc_library(name, srcs=[], hdrs=[], deps=[], data=[]):
    """
    An objc_library that turns on pedantic warnings,
    and enables modules
    """
    native.objc_library(
        name=name,
        deps=deps,
        data=data,
        srcs=srcs,
        hdrs=hdrs,
        enable_modules=True,
        copts=[
            "-Wpedantic"
        ]
    )
```

By loading our `objc_library` into a `BUILD` file, it will override the native

> `objc_library` rule, which is automatically imported.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to promote shadowing native rules?

Author: Absolutely, and it's much easier to read. This is common the python rules and other "official" rules

Reviewer 4: Interesting, we prefix most of our rules that wrap native ones for some reason

Author: I think it's probably an implementation detail or choice up to the author. For reference:
https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/python.html
https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_python
If you preferred to have a prefix from a canned rule set, you can define what a symbol is imported as e.g. `load(":objc_library", pins_objc_library="objc_library")`

```
load(":objc_library.bzl", "objc_library")

# This calls the custom objc_library macro. Thankfully, building this with
# Bazel will error out due to the unavailable argument `copts` used here.
objc_library(name="some", copts=["-DSOME"])
```

The same principals can be applied to many rules: wrapping macros with macros.
With Starlark, the possibilities are endless! _technically they are endless as

> the language is not turing complete_. Please see the

Reviewer 3: ha ha ha

Author: Ahh good catch 😂

[`objc_library`](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/objective-c.html)
documentation for all possible arguments. _Note: Unlike Starlark rules which
are easily added on to Bazel, the `objc_library` is part of the internal java
rules shipped with the Bazel
binary._ 

### Toolchains

> In additional to configuring the build with rules, bazel provides a additional

Reviewer 3: nit: s/bazel/Bazel

primitive, the toolchain. Toolchains provide default compilers and arguments
for those compilers. For the native c++ rules, this is relied upon to configure
the many flags required for cross compilation.

For most iOS projects, configuring the c++ toolchain isn't required. Defining a
custom toolchain is useful to gives full control over compiler invocations or
to customize the compiler being invoked.  Please see the [toolchain
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/tutorial/cc-toolchain-config.html)
to learn more.

### Generated Xcode projects

In an Xcode world, folks checked in a project which contains an listing of
files, build settings, and IDE state. When the project scales, the project file
model breaks down. Auditing and code reviewing config changes in Xcode projects
quickly becomes difficult. With Bazel, human readable `BUILD` files are the
source of truth for build and Xcode configuration. Tools like
[XCHammer](https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer), and

> [Tulsi](https://github.com/bazelbuild/tulsi) use an aspect to traverse the

Reviewer 3: Whats an Aspect? Should we cover that here or at least link to it?

Author: Liked up a pretty good post about aspects: https://kchodorow.com/2017/01/10/aspects-the-fan-fic-of-build-rules/

build graph and extract metadata required to generate a project.  These tools
make it easier to manage the project and generate on demand - not needing to
check it in.

XCHammer provides a rule to [bazel build Xcode
projects](ihttps://github.com/pinterest/xchammer#bazel-build-xcode-projects).
Simply declare the rule with the project and Bazel build the target.
```
load("@xchammer_resources//:xcodeproject.bzl", "xcode_project")
xcode_project(
    name = "MyProject",
    targets = [ "//ios-app:ios-app" ],
    paths = [ "**" ],
)
```

Like any other Bazel target, it's built from the command line
```
bazel build :MyProject
```

The rule definition for the `xcode_project` may be found in the [github
repository](https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer/blob/master/BazelExtensions/xcodeproject.bzl).
Simply put, the aspect traverses sources, and invokes the `xchammer` binary with
a JSON file. Internally, XCHammer instantiates
[`XcodeGen`](https://github.com/yonaskolb/XcodeGen) types and writes them out to
disk with `xcodeproj`.

The workflow for generating an Xcode project with XCHammer is quite simple:
```

> command line -> bazel -> rule -> xchammer -> xcodegen -> xcodeproj

Reviewer 5: is vanilla bazel:  bazel -> rule -> xcodeproj?

Author: There's no way to generate an Xcode project with Bazel its self.

Reviewer 5: With https://tulsi.bazel.build/ for sure, which is also maintained by Bazel?

Author: Tulsi and XCHammer are both external-to-bazel aspects and rules. XCHammer uses tulsi intenrally, but it's an implementation detail

```

Generators like XCHammer and Tulsi take care of integrating Bazel into the IDE.

> Bazel builds are invoked a shell script build phase from the IDE. Basically,

Author: Good point, it's probably worth putting up a blurb about that or linking the readme https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer

Xcode shells out to Bazel to produce the application, and then Xcode picks up
the product from the derived data path. Performing a Bazel build from Xcode.
```
play button -> shell script build phase -> bazel build ios-app
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This was a good explainer, it might be good to diagram of what was described above to help user form a mental model, explain this to their team members, and have a quick reference

Author: Good suggestion, I'll add a diagram of this phase

Reviewer 6: It's really useful and enlightening to have the clarification that the IDE calls bazel via a shell script phase, and then Xcode IDE automatically picks up on the results of bazel building from DerivedData.

Author: Cool glad it made sense. We're planning to build out better xchammer documentation to describe how it works in more depth, this document touches on the higher level concepts that people have used to build Xcode generators with Bazel. I think @kastiglione might have also wrote on this.

Reviewer 7: I did discuss this in our bazelcon talk.

Author: Ahh much appreciated @kastiglione I remember this and great talk BTW. I'll link this up and a few other Bazel con talks to the doc.

## Table of contents

* [Bazel for iOS Developers](#bazel-for-ios-developers)
  * [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  * [Build systems for iOS developers](#build-systems-for-ios-developers)
  * [Bazel projects](#bazel-projects)
     * [Setting up a WORKSPACE](#setting-up-a-workspace)
     * [Adding an iOS application with BUILD files](#adding-an-ios-application-with-build-files)
     * [Bazel command line](#bazel-command-line)
     * [Configurable build attributes](#configurable-build-attributes)
     * [Compiler configuration](#compiler-configuration)
  * [Extending Bazel](#extending-bazel)
     * [Starlark](#starlark)
     * [Rules](#rules)
     * [Macros](#macros)
     * [Aspects](#aspects)
     * [Toolchains](#toolchains)
     * [Generated Xcode projects](#generated-xcode-projects)
  * [More information](#more-information)
     * [Gathering information with Bazel query](#gathering-information-with-bazel-query)
     * [Fixing common Bazel errors](#fixing-common-bazel-errors)
     * [Installing Bazel](#installing-bazel)
     * [Building CocoaPods with Bazel](#building-cocoapods-with-bazel)
  * [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Build systems for iOS developers

> First, let's address the definiton of a `Build system`. According to [Stack
> overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7249871/what-is-a-build-tool_),
> _Build tools are programs that automate the creation of executable applications
> from source code(eg. .apk for android app). Building incorporates
> compiling,linking and packaging the code into a usable or executable form._

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
First, let's address the definiton of a "Build system". According to [Stack
overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7249871/what-is-a-build-tool_):
> Build tools are programs that automate the creation of executable applications
> from source code (e.g., `.apk` for an Android app). Building incorporates
> compiling,linking and packaging the code into a usable or executable form.
```

I know the quote was verbatim but I updated it on Stack Overflow as well 👍

In iOS development, Apple encapsulates build systems inside of Xcode. Xcode is
both the IDE _and build system_. For many developers, Xcode just works. To have
a good experience, most developers don't need to worry about implementing build
systems, IDEs, or compilers. When the project scales, developer experience
drops off. Tasks like building, indexing, or merging a change that adds a new
file can become painful. 

Bazel can fix many problems with iOS builds when done well. First, Bazel is
strict about inputs and outputs - they must be declared. This property, known as
"hermetic" builds, makes builds reproducible and well suited for distributed
cloud builds and caching. For developers, this means better performance due to
cache hitting and not constantly removing derived data. Clean builds become
incremental, decades of CPU cycles saved.  Bazel also makes it easy to automate
many kinds tasks for example, code generating a thrift schema, [generating an
Xcode project](https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer), or [pushing a docker
container](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_docker).  Starklark, a built in

> determinsitc python-like programming language allows developers to implement

Author: I think the doc should open with a short intro touching a breath of topics like benefits, possbilites, and set the stage for what's to come. Perhaps it's ballooned in scope and we can slim it down a bit 👍

)
```

In Xcode this is similar to navigating in the GUI and hitting `File -> New
Target`. Together, the `ios_application` and `objc_library` targets together
would be represented in Xcode as:

![Docs](XcodeExampleOfiOSProject.png)
	
### Bazel command line

In Xcode, command line builds are achieved through the command line interface
`xcodebuild`.  to build the scheme `ios-app` from `MyProject.xcworkspace`,
`xcodebuild`, would be invoked as:

```
xcodebuild -workspace MyProject.xcworkspace -scheme ios-app
```

Bazel exposes a command line which can also do builds. In Bazel, _every_ target
is in the global WORKSPACE and there is no notion of schemes.

```
bazel build ios-app
```

The Bazel command line has hundreds of options, which can be found in the
[Bazel
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/command-line-reference.html).
For iOS developers, a set of useful flags is available at
[bazel-ios-users](https://github.com/ios-bazel-users/ios-bazel-users/blob/master/UsefulFlags.md).

### Configurable build attributes

In addition to the default Bazel options, it's common to create custom
configuration settings to customize builds. Together, `select` and

> `config_setting` yield configurable build attributes.

Reviewer 6: Add clarification that "custom configuration" could mean something like the difference between a build for app store vs a build for development.

Author: Good suggestion, updated 👍

For example, the following build file has conditional `copts` on `:app_store`

```
objc_library(
   name = "some",
   srcs = ["some.m"],
   copts = select({
      # For app_store we need to build `some.m` with a special copt
      ":app_store": ["-DAPPSTORE=1"],
      "//conditions:default": [],
    })
)
config_setting(
    name = "app_store",
    values = { "app_store" : "true" }
)
```

> This is can be set as a define and passed to Bazel on the command line

Reviewer 4: Small typo here

```

> bazel build ios-app --define app_store=true

Reviewer 6: It'd be useful to clarify the logic path that happens here. For example, you first add a config_setting that declares a config that's associated with a value, "app_store". In order to trigger the config ":app_store", the define "app_store=true" needs to be passed into Bazel, and an existing library needs to also be calling "select()" with the config setting named ":app_store". Is this following the logic correctly?

Author: This segment is mean to be simple example and explanation - I think the bazel docs did a good job at explaining `config_setting` in depth -  if not we should PR an improvement to the linked page:
> Configurable attributes are evaluated after the processing of macros and before the processing of rules (technically, between the loading and analysis phases. Any processing that Bazel does before the select() is evaluated will not know which branch will be chosen. In particular, macros can't change their behavior based on the chosen branch, and bazel query can only make conservative guesses about the configurable dependencies of a target. Conversely, when authoring a new type of rule, you do not need to worry about the ambiguity of configurable attributes because all select() expressions have already been replaced by their resolved values. See this FAQ for more on using select() with rules and macros.

`bazelrc` all configure flags. The variable `copts` in `objc_library` passes
flags directly to the compiler. Please find canonical documentation on `copts`
on the [Bazel
docs](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/objective-c.html#objc_library.copts).
Using `objc_library` to define compiler flags is useful for the per-rule level
and many projects use macros and other layers of abstraction to [unify library
level configuration](#Macros).

## Extending Bazel

### Starlark

Bazel provides the
[_pythonic_](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/25011078/what-does-pythonic-mean)
programming language, Starlark. Starlark is used to implement build system
logic and establish norms.  Generally, starlark calls into functionality that's
implemented within Bazel. The coming segments [rules](#rules),
[macros](#macros), and [aspects](#aspects) cover several examples.

```
.bzl file -> starlark -> bazel functions
```

Starlark enables extensibility without needing to fork the core build system.
This boundary helps the developer to focus on their business logic instead of
the core of the build system. For example, the Apple specific logic of bundling

> an `ios_application` is external to Bazel's core residing in the rule set,
> `rules_apple`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
an `ios_application` is defined outside Bazel's core by `rules_apple`.
```

The first time I read this is seemed like you were implying `rules_apple` was the core of Bazel

With Starlark, the possibilities are endless. _technically they aren't endless

> as the language is not turing complete_.For more information, please see the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
as the language is not Turing complete_. For more information, please see the
```

[Starlark
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/language.html).

### Rules

Rules implement business logic for how the iOS application is built by creating
actions. Actions represent invocations of external command line programs like

> `clang` or `bash`. Instances of rule are targets. Typical projects contain many

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`clang` or `bash`. Instances of rules are targets. Typical projects contain many
```

rules, targets, and BUILD files.

> A rule defines a series of actions that Bazel performs on inputs to produce a set of outputs.

_- [the bazel documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/rules.html)_

> In the previous segment, we created an iOS application with via a BUILD file.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In the previous segment, we created an iOS application with a BUILD file.
```

The `ios_application` rule is implemented by `rules_apple` and the

> `objc_library` is a native rule. Native rules are implemented in Java and have
> more power and capabilities needed to implement core functionality like remote
> execution and c++ compilation and are generally used as-is.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`objc_library` is a native rule. Native rules are implemented in Java, have
more power and capabilities needed to implement core functionality (like remote
execution and C++ compilation), and are generally used as-is.
```

```

> BUILD file -> target -> rule -> action -> execution

Reviewer 6: Add an explanation for what logic this flow is meant to represent. A build file calls targets, which call rules, which call actions?

```

Bazel and open source rules should provide most functionality to build an iOS
application. Generally, defining custom rules isn't required but can improve and
consolidate functionality. To learn more about how to create custom rules, the
document, [Bazel
extensions](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/concepts.html)
contains a comprehensive overview.

### Macros

Like [rules](#Rules) and [aspects](#Aspects), macros are
defined in `.bzl` files.  A macro is a convenient way to call a rule, and not

> recognized by Bazel in the same way a rule is.

Reviewer 8: Can you elaborate on "not recognized by Bazel in the same way"?  Maybe with an example

Author: @jszumski thanks for the suggestion, this is a really good point. Here's my quick explanation. 

> As Bazel builds targets, declared by rules, it can't "build" a macro. A macro is evaluated during the evaluation of a `BUILD` file and instantiates rules. Once the macro is translated into a rule, the macro is irrelevant to the build process. In C++ compilation, this behavior is similar to the pre-processor feature of the compiler. Please see the following example of wrapping `objc_library` 

Bazel also has a definition of this which we can link https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/concepts.html#macros-and-rules

_Note: The main distinction between a `.bzl` and a `BUILD` file is `BUILD` files are
used to create targets by calling macros and rules. `.bzl` files define the
implementation._

Most users of Bazel implement a higher level system of macros to encapsulate

> defaults of building librarys and simplify configuration management. To create

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
defaults of building libraries and simplify configuration management. To create
```

a wrapper for `objc_library`, create the file `objc_library.bzl`. The following
macro restricts the customization, and enforces defaults of the native
`objc_library` rule.

```
def objc_library(name, srcs=[], hdrs=[], deps=[], data=[]):
    """
    An objc_library that turns on pedantic warnings,
    and enables modules
    """
    native.objc_library(
        name=name,
        deps=deps,
        data=data,
        srcs=srcs,
        hdrs=hdrs,
        enable_modules=True,
        copts=[
            "-Wpedantic"
        ]
    )
```

By loading our `objc_library` into a `BUILD` file, it will override the native
`objc_library` rule, which is automatically imported.
```
load(":objc_library.bzl", "objc_library")

# This calls the custom objc_library macro. Thankfully, building this with
# Bazel will error out due to the unavailable argument `copts` used here.
objc_library(name="some", copts=["-DSOME"])
```

> The same principals can be applied to many rules: wrapping macros with macros.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The same principles can be applied to many rules: wrapping macros with macros.
```

Please see the
[`objc_library`](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/objective-c.html)
documentation for all possible arguments. _Note: Unlike Starlark rules which

> are easily added on to Bazel, the `objc_library` is part of the internal java

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
are easily added on to Bazel, the `objc_library` is part of the internal Java
```

rules shipped with the Bazel
binary._ 

> _In the Xcode world, configuration is defined within Xcode projects and
> proprietary xcconfigs. In Bazel it's easy to establish norms, enforce
> consistency with abstractions like `objc_library`, and refactor_

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In the Xcode world, configuration is defined within Xcode projects and
proprietary xcconfigs. In Bazel it's easy to establish norms, enforce
consistency with abstractions like `objc_library`, and safely refactor.
```

1. This doesn't seem to fit the mold of other places using italics in this doc.
2. Is "machine-readable" better than "proprietary" here?

Author: Good point, perhaps we can have mention this in depth some where and how Bazel is fundamentally different than what the point of an xcconfig is:
- xcconfigs are a makefile like syntax to configure Xcode build behavior
- Xcode interprets xcconfigs to peform actions in a way that is opaque and unmodifiable by the user
- bazel doesn't have xcconfigs and puts the user in control of the build through settings, rules, aspects, toolchains etc

### Aspects

Aspects are another extension point in Bazel. Simply put, they allow the
developer to traverse the build graph and collect information or generate
actions on the way. 

> Aspects are a feature of Bazel that are basically like fan-fic, if build rules
were stories: aspects let you add features that require intimate knowledge of
the build graph, but that that the rule maintainer would never want to add.

_- [Kristina Chodorow, Aspects: the fan-fic of build rules](https://kchodorow.com/2017/01/10/aspects-the-fan-fic-of-build-rules/)_

> Combined with Rules and the Bazel command line, the user to create robust

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Combined with rules and the Bazel command line, the user is able to create robust
```

architectures and powerful abstractions. Like rules, generally, defining custom
rules isn't required but can improve and consolidate functionality. For more
information about aspects, see [Aspects the fan-fic of build
rules](https://kchodorow.com/2017/01/10/aspects-the-fan-fic-of-build-rules/)

### Toolchains

> In addition to configuring the build with rules, Bazel provides an additional
> primitive, the toolchain. Toolchains provide default compilers and arguments
> for those compilers. For the native c++ rules, this is relied upon to configure
> the many flags required for cross compilation.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In addition to configuring the build with rules, Bazel provides an additional
primitive: the toolchain. Toolchains provide default compilers and arguments
for those compilers. For the native C++ rules, toolchains configure
the many flags required for cross compilation.
```

> For most iOS projects, configuring the c++ toolchain isn't required. Defining a
> custom toolchain is useful to gives full control over compiler invocations or
> to customize the compiler being invoked.  Please see the [toolchain
> documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/tutorial/cc-toolchain-config.html)
> to learn more.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
For most iOS projects, configuring the C++ toolchain isn't required. Defining a
custom toolchain gives full control over compiler invocations or
to customize the compiler being invoked.  Please see the [toolchain
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/tutorial/cc-toolchain-config.html)
to learn more.
```

### Generated Xcode projects

> In an Xcode world, folks checked in a project which contains an listing of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In an Xcode world, folks checked in a project which contains a listing of
```

> In an Xcode world, folks checked in a project which contains an listing of
> files, build settings, and IDE state. When the project scales, the project file
> model breaks down. Auditing and code reviewing config changes in Xcode projects
> quickly becomes difficult. With Bazel, human readable `BUILD` files are the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In an Xcode world, engineers check in a project file, which contains a listing of
source files, build settings, and IDE state. As the codebase scales, the project file
model breaks down, particularly when auditing and code reviewing config changes. With Bazel, human readable `BUILD` files are the
```

source of truth for build and Xcode configuration. Tools like
[XCHammer](https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer), and
[Tulsi](https://github.com/bazelbuild/tulsi) use an aspect to traverse the
build graph and extract metadata required to generate a project.  These tools
make it easier to manage the project and generate on demand - not needing to
check it in.

XCHammer provides a rule to [bazel build Xcode
projects](ihttps://github.com/pinterest/xchammer#bazel-build-xcode-projects).
Simply declare the rule with the project and Bazel build the target.
```

> load("@xchammer_resources//:xcodeproject.bzl", "xcode_project")

Reviewer 6: Does this require declaring git_repository for xchammer_resources in the WORKSPACE file?

Author: In Bazel you need to load every symbol - the XCHammer README also has the `load` statement to add this https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer/pull/235/files#diff-af23f534f9648f42a375a8dbf3792f8bR122

xcode_project(
    name = "MyProject",
    targets = [ "//ios-app:ios-app" ],
    paths = [ "**" ],
)
```

> Like any other Bazel target, it's built from the command line

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Like any other Bazel target, it's built from the command line:
```

```
bazel build :MyProject
```

The rule definition for the `xcode_project` may be found in the [github
repository](https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer/blob/master/BazelExtensions/xcodeproject.bzl).
Simply put, the aspect traverses sources, and invokes the `xchammer` binary with
a JSON file. Internally, XCHammer instantiates
[XcodeGen](https://github.com/yonaskolb/XcodeGen) types and writes them out to
disk with [xcodeproj](https://github.com/tuist/XcodeProj).

Generating an Xcode project with XCHammer:
```
command line -> bazel -> rule -> xchammer -> xcodegen -> project.xcodeproj
```

Generators like XCHammer and Tulsi take care of integrating Bazel into the IDE.
Bazel builds are invoked a shell script build phase from the IDE. Basically,

> Xcode shells out to Bazel to produce the application, and then Xcode picks up

Reviewer 4: Does Xcode pick it up directly from derived data path? I guess it's worth mentioning that Tulsi manages that at least, otherwise one may think that it works out of the box with just a run script phase that builds the app.

Author: @BalestraPatrick This is a really good point, simply put, yes we currently rsync artifacts into the built products in derived data for xcode to pick it up.

For our internal simulator dev builds, there's a much more performant code path than what Xcode can do. We have a dynamic library architecture and integration where dyld3 loads dylibs residing in `bazel-out` via an rpath written into the binary. This is probably too in-depth and should be in a performance optimization segment along with the rules that allow this.

> the product from the derived data path. Performing a Bazel build from Xcode.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the product from the derived data path. 

Performing a Bazel build from Xcode:
```

```
play button -> shell script build phase -> bazel build ios-app
```

![Docs](XcodeBazelRunscript.png)

_In the Xcode world, Xcode's internal build systems produce the application._

## More information

### Gathering information with Bazel query

Bazel query is command line interface that uses a DSL designed to query the
build graph and extract information. This can be used for tooling purposes, or
to simply questions about the build. Here's a few examples:

What extensions does the target `pinterest` depend upon?
```
bazel query 'kind(ios_extension, deps(pinterest))'
```

What are the labels of source files in `app-lib`?
```
bazel query --noimplicit_deps 'labels(srcs, app-lib)'
```

Please see the [Bazel query
documentation](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/query.html) for more
information.

> ### Fixing common Bazel errors

Reviewer 8: Anecdotally, I think this is what most folks find hard about Bazel.  You've got one good example here, but I expect there are other pretty common ones:

1. Attempt to use a rule without `load`ing it first. Someone making a BUILD file for the first time will probably be partially copying an existing one and modifying it.
2. Passing the wrong type to a parameter.
3. Using a target that isn't accessible due to its visibility.

Reviewer 6: To add onto **_1_**, attempting to use a rule without `load`ing it first, and then also forgetting to add the specific method from the .bzl file.

This segment indicates how to fix a basic Bazel error.

Bazel has a few levels of validation which often occur at BUILD time. Note that
since Bazel doesn't type check all files in the WORKSPACE on every build it's
possible to have an error in one target, while other targets still work.

```
ERROR: /path/to/myproject/BUILD:4:13:
objc_library() got unexpected keyword argument: copts
```

In the hypothetical file `/path/to/myproject/BUILD`, at the line `4:13` got an
unexpected keyword argument, `copts` to the macro `objc_library`. The erroneous
code resides in the example in the [macros](#macros) segment, which calls a
custom `objc_library` macro. The macro only exposes the parameters `name`,
`srcs`, `hdrs`, `deps`, and `data`. By attempting to pass `copts` and deviate
from the default `copts`, Bazel triggered an error.

If needed, Bazel generally will indicate the `.bzl` file where the issue
occurred and `BUILD` file that created the error in a call stack like fashion.

To actually fix this error, simply remove the unsupported argument `copts`.

>  _note: Bazel's diagnostic
> convention is similar to how clang and Swift errors look and feel inside of
> Xcode_ 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
 _Note: Bazel's diagnostic
convention is similar to how clang and Swift errors look and feel inside of
Xcode._ 
```

I suspect most new Bazel users won't agree because fix-its and inline messages are a big component of the "feel"

### Installing Bazel

Bazel is commonly invoked via a wrapper script to handle downloading and
installing Bazel binaries at the correct version. To implement reproducible
builds, every dependency should be pinned at a commit, including Bazel. BUILD
files, rules, and protocol buffers, are often tied to a certain release of
Bazel. An popular example of a wrapper script is
[Bazelisk](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazelisk/releases). Bazelisk allows
the user to specify a `.bazelversion` file at the root of the project and
easily update. To work across many Bazel projects, it's convenient to install

> `Bazelisk` onto the path, and invoke it as `bazel`. _Note: In order for Bazel's
> shell completion to work, the wrapper script must be named `bazel`._

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`Bazelisk` onto the path, and invoke it as `bazel`. 

_Note: In order for Bazel's
shell completion to work, the wrapper script must be named `bazel`._
```

I actually didn't know this, so thank you! 🥇

## Conclusion

This concludes the iOS flavored introduction to Bazel. For more information,
the Bazel documentation contains up-to-date tutorials, in-depth knowledge, and
more.

- [Bazel overview](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/bazel-overview.html)
- [A tutorial for iOS apps](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/tutorial/ios-app.html) 
- [Bazel Concepts and terminology](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/build-ref.html)
- [Getting started with Bazel](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/getting-started.html) 
- [Rules](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/rules.html)
- [Encyclopedia](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/overview.html)
- [Starlark](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/language.html)

The community maintains repos and documentation
- [Awesome Bazel](https://github.com/jin/awesome-bazel)
- [ios-bazel-users](https://github.com/ios-bazel-users/ios-bazel-users)
- [Useful Xcode Knowledge](https://github.com/ios-bazel-users/ios-bazel-users/blob/master/UsefulXcodeKnowledge.md)
- [Line's Apple rules](https://github.com/line/rules_apple_line)
- [iOS rules for Bazel - Square, Linkedin](https://github.com/bazel-ios/rules_ios)

> Finally, this document is meant to be updated. If there's additional bullet

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Finally, this document is meant to be updated. If there are additional bullet
```

            "-Wpedantic"
        ]
    )
```

By loading our `objc_library` into a `BUILD` file, it will override the native
`objc_library` rule, which is automatically imported. This is ideal because it
prevents users from accidentally using `native.objc_library` when they should
be using the one that prevents overriding `copts`. This pattern is also used in
[`rules_python`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_python).

```
load(":objc_library.bzl", "objc_library")

# This calls the custom objc_library macro. Thankfully, building this with
# Bazel will error out due to the unavailable argument `copts` used here.
objc_library(name="some", copts=["-DSOME"])
```

The same principles can be applied to many rules: wrapping macros with macros.
Please see the
[`objc_library`](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/objective-c.html)
documentation for all possible arguments. _Note: Unlike Starlark rules which
are easily added on to Bazel, the `objc_library` is part of the internal Java
rules shipped with the Bazel
binary._ 

_In the Xcode world, configuration is defined by Xcode projects and proprietary
xcconfig. In Bazel it's easy to establish conventions and enforce consistency

> with abstractions like `objc_library`, and refactor_

Reviewer 9: How does the Pinterest build do the .bzl to .xcconfig (or if it is the other way around I don't know)? We have both filetypes in our repository. Thanks.

Author: The original usage and unfortunate linage of xcconfig for diagnostics is documented on github:
https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer/blob/master/Docs/FastAndReproducibleBuildsWithXCHammer.md#diagnostics

Simply put, when we migrated to Bazel we generated the `.bzl` and manually synced them up when the diags change - change the `.xcconfig`, change the `.bzl`

The program mentioned in the doc is included with xchammer now and devs have used this in the past when they refactored diagnostic settings. These diagnostic settings don't often have a reason to change
```
tools/XCConfigExporter:xcconfig-exporter
```

Ideally, someone can propose a solution to disable defaults and sidestep this problem. Otherwise, I image an xcconfig evaluator could be integrated as a repository rule or toolchain, I'd be open to reviewing a proposal for this but would prefer the latter.

Author: I opened an issue here, perhaps we can resolve this in the future: https://github.com/pinterest/xchammer/issues/245

Reviewer 9: So I suppose what I'm hoping for is a "You need to change a flag? Here is how you do it." type of entry. This document seems to be more: "You want to set up bazel for iOS? Here you go!". However, I think we need: "So we have a bazel build, but it uses some other specific things found on github. You need to do X? Here is how you do that with PINS current set up." I see a use for this document for external developers, but I think we need more for PINS developers.
